in January of 1970, and Mr. Rutter's illness and death comes that spring.
Actually, he must have taken ill in late January, early February, and he was sick for a while, maybe died in March.
Does that sound right?
I think that's right.
The only time I ever saw President Johnson, he was at the funeral.
Oh, I remember how Johnson and Shivers
a whole bunch of John Connelly were all there.
When you became dean, did you have any specific goals in mind for the college?
Yes.
With respect to the research programs, I wanted to see these greatly expanded and the quality improved.
I think that our teaching had been
in general good through the years, but the research function of the college had lagged, and so I tended to push pretty hard on that.
In fact, some people misunderstood, I think, and I was given the reputation of not caring about teaching on the research, which definitely wasn't true.
My feeling is that the first thing you do is take care of your teaching responsibilities and do it right.
But then you also owe other service and any scientist should owe other service in terms of research.
So that was my main goal was to improve that function.
We also of course needed some space and equipment which was always a nagging problem
And when I remember that we ran freshman chemistry laboratories from either 7 or 8 a.m.
till 11 p.m., five days a week.
And one day, Dr. Williams was visiting, and I took him by the old chemistry building in the first floor basement there, that huge freshman laboratory, and it was just amazing.
overpowering, the crowded conditions, the drabness of it all, and he was shocked, and it was shortly thereafter, I mean very shortly thereafter that we got permission to plan the Heldenfelds building.
When you took over,
which departments or programs did you think were the leaders in the College of Science?
Oh, chemistry by far.
And somebody made a decision some years before you... Brought in Arthur Martell and... How did that come about?
I don't know because I wasn't involved, but Arthur Martell knew a lot.
He was, in the first place, an eminent researcher, very prominent.
and inorganic chemistry, and he knew how things were done other places.
He knew how to get a program development grant, for example.
That's one of the first things he set about doing, get a program development grant from the NSF, which gives you enormous flexibility.
And you can juggle teaching loads, research loads, equipment, all sorts of things.
He did that very skillfully.
So chemistry was way in front, there's no question about it.
Physics was doing well, not as well as chemistry, but it was progressing.
Mathematics, mathematicians and their organization are completely foreign to me, and I was just glad that
Dr. Byers had hired Bob Blakely before I became dean.
I'm just glad Bob speaks eloquent English and thinks in terms like non-mathematicians, and so that made it simpler.
But I can't tell you how math was doing.
They improved dramatically during that time because we, for example, phased out all these instructorships, got in people,
with terminal degrees in mathematics and people who were going to do research.
Now we did have some problems with the teaching there.
There's no question about it because it's a difficult subject and some people were not very diligent about their teaching and we had to make some changes there.
biology was a real problem biology was controlled by the classical biologists who stubbornly failed to recognize that there's a new biology on the loose and it was very difficult as a matter of fact i never did get i'm never did get uh... things settled in biology the way i wanted to uh... tried
with tremendous effort, and Herbert Roller was a great help in trying this.
The inertia was just too much to overcome.
So, let's see, departments, biology, chemistry, physics.
Mathematics, statistics.
And statistics.
And the Cyclotron Institute was later added.
I mean, it had been under Vice President Subtle at the time when Dr. Williams came and made his
decision to change the organization.
That affected this, and did you go off?
That's the background on that.
But we were talking about the
departments in the College of Science, include the cyclotron, and when it came back into the College of Science in, I think, 1971, probably, early 71, I don't remember, maybe the summer of 71, Tom Sugihara became director and did a masterful job of pulling together a proposal that got us funded for multiple years on the National Science Foundation.
All right, then as Dr. Williams becomes president, what was your early impression of him?
Very favorable.
Did he have any key early conversations with deans that you remember?
How did he become aware of what the College of Science was all about?
Well, basically, Dr. Williams worked through vice presidents.
He didn't work directly with deans to any great extent.
But one time I just invited him, come spend a day at the College of Science.
We'll go different places.
I'll show you different things.
Sure, we'll do it.
And he gave me a date and did.
And then we had a dinner out at Briarcrest that night.
And I felt bad because it was something like the 39th consecutive evening that he had been away from home.
And I'm sorry, Dr. Wang.
I said, don't worry about it, Mike.
That's life.
But I always felt that I could talk with him any time I wanted to.
He never showed the slightest irritation toward me.
Did you ever see him lose his cool?
Yes, but never toward me.
Can you share an example of it?
One time, we had recruited a very senior scientist, and so I went over there and said, Dr. Williams, can we earmark some organized research funds for this guy for the next
three years or five years wanted to get him settled here.
He said, now, Mac, if we got people coming here demanding this kind of stuff, we're just not going to, they can just stay away.
I said, hold it, let me go out and come in again.
He didn't ask that.
I'm just asking if you'll do it.
No, he didn't, but he wasn't mad at me.
We were in the MSC, not the MSC, the rudder tower, right after it was finished, and the fireman had been there, and somebody had pulled a heavy piece of equipment across the parquet floor and plowed a trench in it.
I was with him, and he exploded and called them Marine Corps names.
You mentioned Marine Corps.
I learned that he had a very, very exemplary record, wartime record in the Marine Corps.
I never heard him brag about it.
No, he was very low-key.
He was a company commander, I think, of a heavy weapons company, at least by the end of the war.
Wounded, decorated, all that, but I never... Never said much about that.
One thing I remember, for some reason I was in office, and there's something about Lieutenant Calley, the My Lai massacre, and he said, there's no way on earth I would obey an order to mow down civilians.
Now, Dr. Byers was the chief academic officer when Dr. Williams came.
Then he retires?
In 71.
Summer of 71, he went back to his professorship.
All right.
How did Dr. Williams identify the next vice president of academic affairs?
Don't know.
I think I'm quite sure that he and John knew each other previously.
I think so.
And at least had met.
I remember John told me that he was at some meeting where Jack was there, and Jack said, I just wanted to meet somebody named John C. Calhoun.
Because of Clemson.
Yeah, he came around and shook hands with him.
So at least he knew of him.
But I do remember he called, at least me, I don't know about the other things, he called me in and said,
I'm planning on appointing John Calhoun to Vice President of Academic Affairs.
By the way, there's a change in title.
Wayne and Horace both used Academic Vice President.
Yes, that's right.
And then John changed it to Vice President for Academic Affairs.
But he said, I'm considering appointing John to that position.
Do you have any problem with it?
And I said, no, I have none.
And he said, in a way, it's been a little bit unfair to the rest of your deans because John is dean of geosciences, but he's also a vice chancellor.
And so, and he said, in that sense, it's been a little bit unfair to the rest of your deans.
But I said, I have no problem at all.
And by the way, I'll add here, I think John Calhoun has been underappreciated.
I agree entirely because of the immense role that I think he played in helping to move this place forward academically, and under that I mean both teaching and research, and has one of the most creative minds still going strong that I've ever been around.
We got along great.
You know, John never took me to task for anything.
But we laughed that we made an agreement that we would not get mad at the same time.
All right, as he becomes vice president, describe his manner of beginning work with the dean.
He was very easy to see.
Anytime I wanted to see him, there was no problem.
I could argue his decisions and it would not be held against me.
And most important, the next time I came, if I had won the debate the previous time, he didn't hold it against me when I walked in the door.
It was fresh start.
The facts are here, now we'll make this decision.
So he was, I found him easy to work, he was
always willing to listen, and I learned that from him, and I tried to do it when I was vice president.
In fact, see if you agree with this, I believe that he would have held it to someone's discredit if they later had
had said to him honestly, I would have told you, but I was afraid you didn't want me to say it.
Oh, that would really infuriate him.
Oh, no, he wouldn't.
An example, let me put this on tape, an example I give of my own failure.
I'd been over with him only about a month and a half.
We went to a meeting of the library committee, which I had chaired for a good while.
And these were the plans for that first big expansion of the Cushing Library.
They asked him some very detailed questions.
No way he could have known because he hadn't had a chance to look through all of the last pages.
Then they asked me the same questions, and I contradicted the answers he had given because I knew what was in those details.
And I saw the look on his face.
When the meeting was over, as we walked out, he didn't say anything to me.
When we got out of earshot of everybody, I turned to him and I said, Dr. Calhoun, I want to apologize first of all.
Second of all, I want to say to you, if I have a chance to continue, I will demonstrate to you that I will never do that again in a public setting.
to take a contrary view for me.
He looked me very closely in the eye and he said, see to it that you don't.
Subject ended, never mentioned again ever, and within six or eight steps we're chuckling.
And I thought that was good advice for him.
Am I, is my memory correct?
We had a dean's meeting every week.
Academic Programs Committee Monday at 1 o'clock.
That's what I thought.
And it included the academic deans plus
Was Cooper there?
Yes, because registration always was a matter that we needed to thresh out.
But I can't think of any, the library director was not there.
No.
I got to sit in with my, even before I had the title dean of faculties, and Winnerty was there so that it was the key academic.
Right.
They were good meetings.
I thought those were very, very... I continued that after I took over and then after you left I continued right up until the time I resigned.
Do you remember during those years any decisions which now in hindsight look like very key decisions whether they were positive or negative?
I don't have any in mind.
I don't either.
I'm sure there are some, but it's been a gradual process.
The whole progress has been a gradual process, and I don't remember any specifically.
Do you agree with me that we all, even subconsciously,
were aware that this place was moving, it was growing, it was getting better.
Oh yeah.
But we were part of something that was happening.
One time, shortly after the Texan opened, you know it used to be open for lunch, I was sort of down there, and Dave Brooks, who was in charge of our freshman chemistry program,
And he was in the group, and something sticks in my mind still.
He said, anybody who isn't impressed with the way this university is moving is unconscious or burst that effect.
Of your fellow deans, were there any that you thought had more access to John Calhoun's or Jack Williams' ear than anybody else?
Were there any deans that had more?
I don't think so.
I think that, well, maybe Dave and I did.
I don't know.
What do you think?
No, I didn't think so.
It seemed like everything was just plain fair with him.
I thought in the olden days, before I was there at the table to know whether it was true or not, I'd always heard that engineering and or particularly agriculture
could almost veto anything.
But I did not think that was true.
No, I don't think so.
I think that maybe Pearson did initially because he and John played poker in the same club.
And so, well, and Romanick was in that club.
But I don't think that sloshed over so much.
At least I never felt any disadvantage.
What was, for you as a real working dean, what did you see as the role of Dick Winerdi?
Well, not easy to say.
He took care of a lot of the details of the office there.
He liked to at least give the impression that he was involved in the decision making, and I presume he was.
As I say, he gave that impression, and I presume he was.
I had the impression that Dick loved crises.
Yes.
That he worked best if he could visualize a crisis and impress it on the typing pool and Jeanette and so forth that we have a big crisis we've got to solve.
I was stunned my first day as a full-time member of that staff.
He and I went into Dr. Calhoun's office probably at 5.30.
Everybody else was gone.
And he took issue strongly with something Calhoun had drafted.
And I think he even said, John, you don't know what you're talking about here.
I was stunned.
And then I realized that Calhoun, later, by experience, I realized that Calhoun was very receptive to that kind of sentiment privately
Yeah.
And if you had some basis for it.
Oh, yeah.
You'd better have a reason.
That's right.
Yeah.
You'd better have a reason.
All right.
Did you all feel there was a good turnaround time on matters?
Yes.
With Calhoun?
Yeah.
And with Williams?
Was there bored or interference that you recall in those years?
with anything, I don't remember particularly.
By the board?
Not right then, later.
And since there was no system, since Williams and Rudder had for a number of years been the chief academic officer of both, then you didn't have to worry about whether this was a system matter or a campus matter.
Correct, yeah.
And I presume that also saved a lot, not only time, but a lot of money.
Certainly a lot of paper.
I used to think that was not a good system, but in retrospect, I believe it's a lot better than what we have now because it minimized the system functions and work.
Do you remember of any proposal ideas that you had that you sent forward that you wish had gotten approved?
There probably were some, but I can't recall any right now.
Well, can you think of, and I don't have anything in mind, can you think of any missteps that were made in the Rudder Williams years?
Well, in retrospect, it looks so much better than what's going on now.
That I can't think of any.
I thought, you know, I was an administrator at a time when it was really fun to be.
I felt like I was doing something.
I felt like we were going somewhere.
The institution was upward bound qualitatively, not just in numbers, but qualitatively.
The people I worked with were by and large congenial, and it was just a great time to be a dean and a vice president.
And when it quit being fun, Haskell, I quit because research was still fun.
Administration wasn't because of the system.
Now, you kept your, did you keep your lab throughout?
Yes, I did.
Your dean?
Yes, and bless their hearts, Stella Wilkes and Mary Evelyn Bayless saved my career.
All right, and let's talk about them for a second.
When did they join you?
At one time, I had these numbers down, but I'm gonna have to approximate them now.
Stella and I must have worked together for 26 years, and Mary for 20.
I'll tell you what, we can date Stella's time in my lab from when Dr. Ray Richardson became head of Agricultural Analytical Services because Stella said, I'm going to resign here, stay out a year, and I'm going back to work for Dr. Prescott.
And Ray said, I kind of thought maybe something like that was going to happen.
And her husband, Lambert Wilkes, was a faculty member in... Agricultural engineering, very distinguished career in research.
I don't know, he is not probably taught quite so much, but he's been terrific in research.
Three Clemson graduates, he, Luther Byrd, and Tom Cartwright.
Terrific researchers.
But then Mary came after Garland finished his PhD.
She worked for Carl Fokers over there, a very eminent organic chemist.
And she came to my lab after that.
So the two of them and... They're so good at what they did.
I never, you know, we just would take, we just talk in general terms of what we're going to do.
While I was being administrative, they were running my lab.
It was still productive.
I had a place to go home to.
Haskell, if I hadn't had a place to go back to, I don't know what I'd have done.
And through all of those administrative years as dean and as vice president, you didn't get a cent of compensation
salary did you for your research no that's what i thought that no that that was uh it was okay i mean i was i was happy with what they paid labor of luck they did i did have quite a struggle in getting their salaries to where they were where they were up the uh with williams were you aware before his heart attack were you aware of decline in his physical no no i wasn't i wasn't either of course um
When did this happen?
Early 76.
Yeah, that's right, early 76.
Our centennial year, which was going to be the end-all be-all.
And he was in desperate condition for a while, then slowly recovered.
Came back in the summer.
Right, yes.
And then...
The board had decided during that time that the system would be recreated and he would be made Chancellor.
And I don't know exactly how I became aware that that was going to happen.
I can't remember any.
specific announcement or anything.
I guess we read it in the battalion or the Eagle probably would just be my guess.
But incidentally, that's how you used to find out if you were promoted.
Yes.
You know, the Eagle was an afternoon paper in those days and you'd pick up the Eagle after the board met and see if you'd been promoted.
That's right.
All right, I rode with Dr. Calhoun to the board meeting at which
the board was going to decide who the new president was.
I had pretty good reason to believe that Dr. Williams was going to recommend it was Dr. Calhoun.
I think that he did.
And that instead the board selected Dr. Miller.
Were you as a dean aware of what was going to happen?
See, remember you and I were also interviewed.
Yes.
And I don't know who else.
Maybe Lee Smith.
Yes, I think Lee Smith from Southwest Texas, who's one of our PhDs, statistics.
And I figured, really, Jack wrote me and said, send me your curriculum.
He didn't tell me why, but it's pretty obvious why.
I'm sure he did do the same way.
But I figured that mine was more wonder-dressing than anything else.
And I thought that...
I figured John was going to be it.
I did too.
Were you aware of the campaign across the state by the experiment station?
It became clear toward the end.
Then I rode back with Dr. Calhoun after the meeting.
He was just as calm.
Where was the meeting?
I forgot.
It was over in the board.
Oh, it was here on campus.
It wasn't in one of these off campus.
And he was just as calm after the meeting as he was before outwardly.
And he had gone in and resigned.
Well, see, he had just turned down the Nebraska job.
And let me get this.
You mentioned that.
Let me add this so it'll be preserved.
When that one day, when he had that offer before him, after 5 o'clock, he asked me and Winerti what we thought.
And we said, Dr. Calhoun, and we didn't conspire in advance.
Each of us agreed that he ought to take it.
And I threw out the opinion, I think that you're so bright that you sometimes scare the A&M board, that they think you're so brainy that they're intimidated.
And I'm afraid that they will never give you the leadership role that you deserve here.
Well, Nerdy agreed with me.
And, but Dr. Calhoun said, well, but I think I'm gonna stay here.
This is home.
Was this chancellor or president there?
Chancellor's like Missouri.
Chancellor's the local.
I don't think at that time they had yet divided it.
Okay.
And if I'm not mistaken, they then picked Woody Varner, an A&M graduate.
I was thinking that Varner was retiring, and that was the reason for this.
No, that wouldn't be right.
Varna was class of 40 here.
So he's roughly a little older than I am, but not much, a couple years older.
And Calhoun is, what's he, three or four years older than I am.
He's 81.
I'm 78, he's 81.
And they picked Jarvis.
On Monday, Calhoun had already moved out of his office out of the T building.
and Dr. Miller was there.
Tell me about his contact with you for you to become the chief academic officer.
I believe that there's a party over at, I can't remember who, maybe Dudley and Angela Smith's house, a celebration party for this, and I was invited.
went over and Jarvis said, need an academic vice president.
And I said, I'd be glad to give you some names of people I think who'd be considered.
And so that was it.
that night at that party.
And then the next day, Jarvis didn't move into the building for a while.
He stayed for a few days in the old Experiment Station office.
And so Betty came in and said, you've got a call from Dr. Miller and he wants to see you.
And so I went over there.
And then that's when he really began talking with me about it.
I didn't know whether he wanted my recommendations or somebody began talking with me about it.
I gathered that he was essentially, had his mind made up, but he said, I want to talk to Dave, and I don't know, he'd probably talk to you and to Dave.
He told, when he talked to me, he said it was either going to be you, me, or Dave.
Well, that was the impression I had, and at the time I left, I thought, well, it's
Sounds like he may offer me the job, but I won't be a loser in any case if it's one of these two other guys.
In fact, Dave, after I was appointed, Dave came around and said, I feel like I've still got most of the chips in this game, which I thought was really nice of him.
Then I guess he made up his mind, and he asked me, he wanted a briefing by all the different deans.
Do you remember that?
After he moved into Dr. Collins' office, he wanted a briefing by all the different deans.
He asked me to sit on all the briefings.
Well, you know, this is what you call telegraphing your punch.
So, you know, there I'm sitting, and here's Benson coming and presenting the engineering programs, and Pearson presenting the business.
And by the way, that's, John made one of these offers that I'll, you know, if you want somebody in business, I'll resign.
and you appoint somebody else, and Jarvis said, well, I'll think it over.
And that was handled badly.
I think that John Pearson was stabbed in the back by one of his own faculty members who had rapport with one of Jarvis's assistants.
I think that's true.
You on my wavelength?
Yeah, I think so.
I think that's what happened.
I think it was a bad deal.
Anyhow, then I was sitting in on all these briefings,
Did Jarvis try to size up any of your opinions, preconceptions before making the decision?
On what?
Make the decision on what?
Before he selected you.
Did he try to be sure that you agreed with him on this, this, or this?
Not that I recall.
I don't think so.
I never heard any allegation of that.
And by the way, Jarvis was also easy to, if you will, I told him when he appointed him, I said, now Jarvis, I can help you only if I tell you what I really think and not what I think you want me to say.
Fine.
As you were identified,
Did Dr. Calhoun contact you in any manner?
I don't remember.
I do remember I called him and urged him to stay on.